Abstract---An Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is an information
processing paradigm that is inspired by the way biological nervous
systems, such as the brain, process information. The key element of this
paradigm is the novel structure of the information processing system. It
is composed of a large number of highly interconnected processing
elements (neurons) working in unison to solve specific problems. ANNs,
like people, learn by example. An ANN is configured for a specific
application, such as pattern recognition or data classification, through
a learning process. Learning in biological systems involves adjustments
to the synaptic connections that exist between the neurons. This is true
of ANNs as well. This paper gives overview of Artificial Neural Network,
working & training of ANN. It also explain the application and
advantages of ANN. Keywords:- ANN(Artificial Neural Network), Neurons,
pattern recognition.
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\*\*\*\*\*\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
INTRODUCTION The study of the human brain is thousands of years old.
With the advent of modern electronics, it was only natural to try to
harness this thinking process. The first step toward artificial neural
networks came in 1943 when Warren McCulloch, a neurophysiologist, and a
young mathematician, Walter Pitts, wrote a paper on how neurons might
work. They modeled a simple neural network with electrical circuits.
Neural networks, with their remarkable ability to derive meaning from
complicated or imprecise data, can be used to extract patterns and
detect trends that are too complex to be noticed by either humans or
other computer techniques. A trained neural network can be thought of as
an \"expert\" in the category of information it has been given to
analyse. Other advantages include: 1. Adaptive learning: An ability to
learn how to do tasks based on the data given for training or initial
experience. 2. Self-Organisation: An ANN can create its own organisation
or representation of the information it receives during learning time.
3. Real Time Operation: ANN computations may be carried out in parallel,
and special hardware devices are being designed and manufactured which
take advantage of this capability. 4. Fault Tolerance via Redundant
Information Coding: Partial destruction of a network leads to the
corresponding degradation of performance. However, some network
capabilities may be retained even with major network damage. Neural
networks take a different approach to problem solving than that of
conventional computers. Conventional computers use an algorithmic
approach i.e. the computer follows a set of instructions in order to
solve a problem. Unless the specific steps that the computer needs to
follow are known the computer cannot solve the problem. That restricts
the problem solving capability of conventional computers to problems
that we already understand and know how to solve. But computers would be
so much more useful if they could do things that we don\'t exactly know
how to do. Neural networks process information in a similar way the
human brain does. The network is composed of a large number of highly
interconnected processing elements (neurons) working in parallel to
solve a specific problem. Neural networks learn by example. They cannot
be programmed to perform a specific task. The examples must be selected
carefully otherwise useful time is wasted or even worse the network
might be functioning incorrectly. The disadvantage is that because the
network finds out how to solve the problem by itself, its operation can
be unpredictable. On the other hand, conventional computers use a
cognitive approach to problem solving; the way the problem is to solved
must be known and stated in small unambiguous instructions. These
instructions are then converted to a high level language program and
then into machine code that the computer can understand. These machines
are totally predictable; if anything goes wrong is due to a software or
hardware fault. Neural networks and conventional algorithmic computers
are not in competition but complement each other. There are tasks are
more suited to an algorithmic approach like arithmetic operations and
tasks that are more suited to neural networks. Even more, a large number
of tasks, require systems that use a combination of the two approaches
(normally a conventional computer is used to supervise the neural
network) in order to perform at maximum efficiency. What is Artificial
Neural Network? Artificial Neural Networks are relatively crude
electronic models based on the neural structure of the brain. The brain
basically learns from experience. It is natural proof that some problems
that are beyond the scope of current computers are indeed solvable by
small energy efficient packages. This brain modeling also promises a
less technical way to develop machine solutions. This new approach to
computing also provides a more graceful degradation during system
overload than its more traditional counterparts. These biologically
inspired methods of computing are thought to be the next major
advancement in the computing industry. Even simple animal brains are
capable of functions that are currently impossible for computers.
Computers do rote things well, like keeping ledgers or performing
complex math. But computers have trouble recognizing even simple
patterns much less generalizing those patterns of the past into actions
of the future. Now, advances in biological research promise an initial
understanding of the natural thinking mechanism. This research shows
that brains store information as patterns. Some of these patterns are
very complicated and allow us the ability to recognize individual faces
from many different angles. This process of storing information as
patterns, utilizing those patterns, and then solving problems
encompasses a new field in computing. This field, as mentioned before,
does not utilize traditional programming but involves the creation of
massively parallel networks and the training of those networks to solve
specific problems. This field also utilizes words very different from
traditional computing, words like behave, react, selforganize, learn,
generalize, and forget. Whenever we talk about a neural network, we
should more popularly say ―Artificial Neural Network (ANN)‖, ANN are
computers whose architecture is modelled after the brain. They typically
consist of hundreds of simple processing units which are wired together
in a complex communication network. Each unit or node is a simplified
model of real neuron which sends off a new signal or fires if it
receives a sufficiently strong Input signal from the other nodes to
which it is connected. Traditionally neural network was used to refer as
network or circuit of biological neurones, but modern usage of the term
often refers to ANN. ANN is mathematical model or computational model,
an information processing paradigm i.e. inspired by the way biological
nervous system, such as brain information system. ANN is made up of
interconnecting artificial neurones which are programmed like to mimic
the properties of m biological neurons. These neurons working in unison
to solve specific problems. ANN is configured for solving artificial
intelligence problems without creating a model of real biological
system. ANN is used for speech recognition, image analysis, adaptive
control etc. These applications are done through a learning process,
like learning in biological system, which involves the adjustment
between neurones through synaptic connection. Same happen in the ANN.
Working of ANN: The other parts of the ―art‖ of using neural networks
revolve around the myriad of ways these individual neurons can be
clustered together. This clustering occurs in the human mind in such a
way that information can be processed in a dynamic, interactive, and
self-organizing way. Biologically, neural networks are constructed in a
three-dimensional world from microscopic components. These neurons seem
capable of nearly unrestricted interconnections. That is not true of any
proposed, or existing, man-made network. Integrated circuits, using
current technology, are twodimensional devices with a limited number of
layers for interconnection. This physical reality restrains the types,
and scope, of artificial neural networks that can be implemented in
silicon. Currently, neural networks are the simple clustering of the
primitive artificial neurons. This clustering occurs by creating layers
which are then connected to one another. How these layers connect is the
other part of the \"art\" of engineering networks to resolve real world
problems.
